# 搜索和替代

推荐设置`set ignorecase smartcase`

在全是小写的情况下，ignore，有大写变为严格模式

## First And Last Character In A Line

You can use `^` to match the first character in a line and `$` to match the last character in a line.

If you have this text:

```
hello hello
```

You can target the first "hello" with `/^hello`. The character that follows `^` must be the first character in a line. To target the last "hello", run `/hello$`. The character before `$` must be the last character in a line.

If you have this text:

```
hello hello friend
```

Running `/hello$` will not match anything because "friend" is the last term in that line, not "hello".

## Searching For Alternative Words

或者---可以使用`|`

```
hello vim
hola vim
salve vim
bonjour vim
```

To match both "hello" and "hola", you can do `/hello\|hola`. You have to escape (`\`) the or (`|`) operator, otherwise Vim will literally search for the string "|".

使用魔法模式可以省略一个`\` ---- 模式模式`\v`

`/\vhello|hola`

## Setting The Start And End Of A Match

有时候我们需要搜索在特定情况下的单词

```
11vim22
vim22
11vim
vim
```

If you need to select "vim" but only when it starts with "11" and ends with "22", you can use `\zs` (starting match) and `\ze` (ending match) operators. Run:

```
/11\zsvim\ze22
```

注意这个选中的是vim 不是11vim22!!!!!

## Searching Character Ranges

和正则表达式类似使用`[]`来获得范围

`/[0-9]` -- 0-9

You can combine these ranges together. If you need to search for digits 0-9 and both lowercase and uppercase alphas from "a" to "f" (like a hex), you can do `/[0-9a-fA-F]`.

我们可以进行否定搜索---- `/[^0-9]` ---- 这个开始结束标志一样，但是作用不同

## Searching For Repeating Characters

和正则类似

- `{n}` is an exact match. `/[0-9]\{2\}` matches the two digit numbers: "11" and the "11" in "111".
- `{n,m}` is a range match. `/[0-9]\{2,3\}` matches between 2 and 3 digit numbers: "11" and "111".
- `{,m}` is an up-to match. `/[0-9]\{,3\}` matches up to 3 digit numbers: "1", "11", and "111".
- `{n,}` is an at-least match. `/[0-9]\{2,\}` matches at least a 2 or more digit numbers: "11" and "111".

 Vim has special operators for them: `*` and `+` (`+` needs to be escaped while `*` works fine without the escape). 

## Predefined Character Ranges

```
\d    Digit [0-9]
\D    Non-digit [^0-9]
\s    Whitespace character (space and tab)
\S    Non-whitespace character (everything except space and tab)
\w    Word character [0-9A-Za-z_]
\l    Lowercase alphas [a-z]
\u    Uppercase character [A-Z]
```

https://learnvim.irian.to/basics/search_and_substitute

## 替换模式

语法

```
:s/{old-pattern}/{new-pattern}/
```

## Repeating The Last Substitution

You can repeat the last substitute command with either the normal command `&` or by running `:s`. If you have just run `:s/good/awesome/`, running either `&` or `:s` will repeat it.

Also, earlier in this chapter I mentioned that you can use `//` to repeat the previous search pattern. This trick works with the substitution command. If `/good` was done recently and you leave the first substitute pattern argument blank, like in `:s//awesome/`, it works the same as running `:s/good/awesome/`.

## Substitution Range

普通的s只对当前行有效，我们可以在前面添加[range]来选择多行

> 从当前行开始

```
:3,5s/let/const/
```

- `:,3/let/const/` - if nothing is given before the comma, it represents the current line. Substitute from current line to line 3.
- `:1,s/let/const/` - if nothing is given after the comma, it also represents the current line. Substitute from line 1 to current line.
- `:3s/let/const/` - if only one value is given as range (no comma), it does substitution on that line only.

In Vim, `%` usually means the entire file. If you run `:%s/let/const/`, it will do substitution on all lines. Keep in mind of this range syntax. Many command-line commands that you will learn in the upcoming chapters will follow this f

## Pattern Matching

If you have the following expressions:

```
let one = 1;
let two = 2;
let three = 3;
let four = 4;
let five = 5;
```

To add a pair of double quotes around the digits:

```
:%s/\d/"\0"/
```

The result:

```
let one = "1";
let two = "2";
let three = "3";
let four = "4";
let five = "5";
```

Let's break down the command:

- `:%s` targets the entire file to perform substitution.
- `\d` is Vim's predefined range for digits (similar to using `[0-9]`).
- **`"\0"` here the double quotes are literal double quotes. `\0` is a special character representing "the whole matched pattern". The matched pattern here is a single digit number, `\d`.**

Alternatively, `&` also represents the whole matched pattern like `\0`. `:s/\d/"&"/` would have also worked.

> 可以使用\v开启 魔法模式，上省略转义

Let's consider another example. Given these expressions and you need to swap all the "let" with the variable names.

```
Copy
one let = "1";
two let = "2";
three let = "3";
four let = "4";
five let = "5";
```

To do that, run:

```
Copy
:%s/\(\w\+\) \(\w\+\)/\2 \1/
```

The command above contains too many backslashes and is hard to read. In this case it is more convenient to use the `\v` operator:

```
Copy
:%s/\v(\w+) (\w+)/\2 \1/
```

The result:

```
Copy
let one = "1";
let two = "2";
let three = "3";
let four = "4";
let five = "5";
```

Great! Let's break down that command:

- `:%s` targets all the lines in the file to perform substitution.
- `(\w+) (\w+)` is a group match. `\w` is one of Vim's predefined ranges for a word character (`[0-9A-Za-z_]`). The `( )` surrounding it captures a word character match in a group. Notice the space between the two groupings. `(\w+) (\w+)` captures two groups. The first group captures "one" and the second group captures "two".
- `\2 \1` returns the captured group in a reversed order. `\2` contains the captured string "let" and `\1` the string "one". Having `\2 \1` returns the string "let one".

Recall that `\0` represents the entire matched pattern. You can break the matched string into smaller groups with `( )`. Each group is represented by `\1`, `\2`, `\3`, etc.

Let's do one more example to solidify this group match concept. If you have these numbers:

```
Copy
123
456
789
```

To reverse the order, run:

```
Copy
:%s/\v(\d)(\d)(\d)/\3\2\1/
```

The result is:

```
Copy
321
654
987
```

Each `(\d)` matches each digit and creates a group. On the first line, the first `(\d)` has a value of 1, the second `(\d)` has a value of 2, and the third `(\d)` has a value of 3. They are stored in the variables `\1`, `\2`, and `\3`. In the second half of your substitution, the new pattern `\3\2\1` results in the "321" value on line one.

## Substitution Flags

If you have the sentence:

```
chocolate pancake, strawberry pancake, blueberry pancake
```

To substitute all the pancakes into donuts, you cannot just run:

```
:s/pancake/donut
```

The command above will only substitute the first match, giving you:

```
chocolate donut, strawberry pancake, blueberry pancake
```

There are two ways to solve this. You can either run the substitute command twice more or you can pass it a global (`g`) flag to substitute all of the matches in a line.

Let's talk about the global flag. Run:

```
:s/pancake/donut/g
```

Vim substitutes all pancakes with donuts in one swift command. The global command is one of the several flags the substitute command accepts. You pass flags at the end of the substitute command. Here is a list of useful flags:

```
&    Reuse the flags from the previous substitute command.
g    Replace all matches in the line.
c    Ask for substitution confirmation.
e    Prevent error message from displaying when substitution fails.
i    Perform case insensitive substitution.
I    Perform case sensitive substitution.
```

There are more flags that I do not list above. To read about all the flags, check out `:h s_flags`.

By the way, the repeat-substitution commands (`&` and `:s`) do not retain the flags. Running `&` will only repeat `:s/pancake/donut/` without `g`. To quickly repeat the last substitute command with all the flags, run `:&&`.

## Changing The Delimiter

有的时候在替换pattern中间能以区分正反斜杠，此时我们可以使用+来代替

```
:s/https:\/\/mysite.com\/a\/b\/c\/d\/e/hello/
:s+https:\/\/mysite.com\/a\/b\/c\/d\/e+hello+
```

## Special Replace

You can also modify the case of the text you are substituting. Given the following expressions and your task is to uppercase the variables "one", "two", "three", etc.

```
Copy
let one = "1";
let two = "2";
let three = "3";
let four = "4";
let five = "5";
```

Run:

```
Copy
:%s/\v(\w+) (\w+)/\1 \U\2/
```

You will get:

```
Copy
let ONE = "1";
let TWO = "2";
let THREE = "3";
let FOUR = "4";
let FIVE = "5";
```

The breakdown:

- `(\w+) (\w+)` captures the first two matched groups, such as "let" and "one".
- `\1` returns the value of the first group, "let".
- `\U\2` uppercases (`\U`) the second group (`\2`).

The trick of this command is the expression `\U\2`. `\U` instructs the following character to be uppercased.

## Alternative Patterns

You need to substitute the word "vim" with "friend" but only on the lines containing the word "hello" or "hola". Recall from earlier this chapter, you can use `|` for multiple alternative patterns.

```
:%s/\v(hello|hola) vim/\1 friend/g
```

## Substituting The Start And The End Of A Pattern

Recall that you can use `\zs` and `\ze` to define the start and the end of a match. This technique works in substitution too. If you have:

```
Copy
chocolate pancake
strawberry sweetcake
blueberry hotcake
```

To substitute the "cake" in "hotcake" with "dog" to get a "hotdog":

```
Copy
:%s/hot\zscake/dog/g
```

Result:

```
Copy
chocolate pancake
strawberry sweetcake
blueberry hotdog
```

## 贪婪和非贪婪

You can substitute the nth match in a line with this trick:

```
One Mississippi, two Mississippi, three Mississippi, four Mississippi, five Mississippi.
```

To substitute the third "Mississippi" with "Arkansas", run:

```
:s/\v(.{-}\zsMississippi){3}/Arkansas/g
```

The breakdown:

- `:s/` the substitute command.
- `\v` is the magic keyword so you don't have to escape special keywords.
- `.` matches any single character.
- `{-}` performs non-greedy match of 0 or more of the preceding atom.
- `\zsMississippi` makes "Mississippi" the start of the match.
- `(...){3}` looks for the third match.

You have seen the `{3}` syntax earlier in this chapter. In this case, `{3}` will match exactly the third match. The new trick here is `{-}`. It is a non-greedy match. It finds the shortest match of the given pattern. In this case, `(.{-}Mississippi)` matches the least amount of "Mississippi" preceded by any character. Contrast this with `(.*Mississippi)` where it finds the longest match of the given pattern.

If you use `(.{-}Mississippi)`, you get five matches: "One Mississippi", "Two Mississippi", etc. If you use `(.*Mississippi)`, you get one match: the last "Mississippi". `*` is a greedy matcher and `{-}` is a non-greedy matcher. To learn more check out `:h /\{-` and `:h non-greedy`.

Let's do a simpler example. If you have the string:

```
abc1de1
```

You can match "abc1de1" (greedy) with:

```
/a.*1
```

You can match "abc1" (non-greedy) with:

```
/a.\{-}1
```

So if you need to uppercase the longest match (greedy), run:

```
:s/a.*1/\U&/g
```

To get:

```
ABC1DEFG1
```

If you need to uppercase the shortest match (non-greedy), run:

```
:s/a.\{-}1/\U&/g
```

To get:

```
ABC1defg1
```

If you're new to greedy vs non-greedy concept, it can get hard to wrap your head around it. Experiment around with different combinations until you understand it.

## 跨文件

Finally, let's learn how to substitute phrases across multiple files. For this section, assume that you have two files: `food.txt` and `animal.txt`.

Inside `food.txt`:

```
corndog
hotdog
chilidog
```

Inside `animal.txt`:

```
large dog
medium dog
small dog
```

Assume your directory structure looks like this:

```
- food.txt
- animal.txt
```

First, capture both `food.txt` and `animal.txt` inside `:args`. Recall from earlier chapters that `:args` can be used to create a list of file names. There are several ways to do this from inside Vim, one of them is by running this from inside Vim:

```
:args *.txt                  captures all txt files in current location
```

To test it, when you run `:args`, you should see:

```
[food.txt] animal.txt
```

Now that all the relevant files are stored inside the argument list, you can perform a multi-file substitution with the `:argdo` command. Run:

```
:argdo %s/dog/chicken/
```

This performs substitution against the all files inside the `:args` list. Finally, save the changed files with:

```
:argdo update
```

`:args` and `:argdo` are useful tools to apply command line commands across multiple files. Try it with other commands!

## Substituting Across Multiple Files With Macros

Alternatively, you can also run the substitute command across multiple files with macros. Run:

```
Copy
:args *.txt
qq
:%s/dog/chicken/g
:wnext
q
99@q
```

The breakdown:

- `:args *.txt` adds all text files into the `:args` list.
- `qq` starts the macro in the "q" register.
- `:%s/dog/chicken/g` substitutes "dog" with "chicken" on all lines in the current file.
- `:wnext` saves the file then go to the next file on the `args` list.
- `q` stops the macro recording.
- `99@q` executes the macro ninety-nine times. Vim will stop the macro execution after it encounters the first error, so Vim won't actually execute the macro ninety-nine times.