# 全局命令

全局命令就是同时作用在多行上的命令 --- 作用在行上的。

```
:g/pattern/command
```

The `pattern` matches all lines containing that pattern, similar to the pattern in the substitute command. The `command` can be any command-line command. The global command works by executing `command` against each line that matches the `pattern`.

```\
const one = 1;
console.log("one: ", one);

const two = 2;
console.log("two: ", two);

const three = 3;
console.log("three: ", three);
```

```
:g/console/d
```

```
const one = 1;

const two = 2;

const three = 3;
```

## 逆向匹配

```
:g!/pattern/command
:v/pattern/command
```

使用命令修改没有匹配到的line

> pattern匹配和之前的搜索代替pattern先相同

## Passing A Range

You can pass a range before the `g` command. Here are some ways you can do it:

- `:1,5g/console/d` matches the string "console" between lines 1 and 5 and deletes them.
- `:,5g/console/d` if there is no address before the comma, then it starts from the current line. It looks for the string "console" between the current line and line 5 and deletes them.
- `:3,g/console/d` if there is no address after the comma, then it ends at the current line. It looks for the string "console" between line 3 and the current line and deletes them.
- `:3g/console/d` if you only pass one address without a comma, it executes the command only on line 3. It looks on line 3 and deletes it if has the string "console".

In addition to numbers, you can also use these symbols as range:

- `.` means the current line. A range of `.,3` means between the current line and line 3.
- `$` means the last line in the file. `3,$` range means between line 3 and the last line.
- `+n` means n lines after the current line. You can use it with `.` or without. `3,+1` or `3,.+1` means between line 3 and the line after the current line.

## Normal Command

You can run a normal command with the global command with `:normal` command-line command.

If you have this text:

```
Copyconst one = 1console.log("one: ", one)
const two = 2console.log("two: ", two)
const three = 3console.log("three: ", three)
```

To add a ";" to the end of each line, run:

```
Copy
:g/./normal A;
```

Let's break it down:

- `:g` is the global command.
- `/./` is a pattern for "non-empty lines". It matches the lines with at least one character, so it matches the lines with "const" and "console" and it does not match empty lines.
- `normal A;` runs the `:normal` command-line command. `A;` is the normal mode command to insert a ";" at the end of the line.

> 同样可以使用宏

## Changing The Delimiter

You can change the global command's delimiter like the substitute command. The rules are the same: you can use any single byte character except for alphabets, numbers, `"`, `|`, and `\`.

To delete the lines containing "console":

```
:g@console@d
```

If you are using the substitute command with the global command, you can have two different delimiters:

```
g@one@s+const+let+g
```

Here the global command will look for all lines containing "one". The substitute command will substitute, from those matches, the string "const" with "let".

>`:g/re/p`可以查看选中的行

## Reversing The Entire Buffer

To reverse the entire file, run:

```
Copy
:g/^/m 0
```

`^` is a pattern for the beginning of a line. Use `^` to match all lines, including empty lines.

If you need to reverse only a few lines, pass it a range. To reverse the lines between line five to line ten, run:

```
Copy
:5,10g/^/m 0
```

To learn more about the move command, check out `:h :move`.

> :m [n]   移动到n行的下面
>
> :t [n] 复制到n行下面

## Aggregating All TODOs

When coding, sometimes I would write TODOs in the file I'm editing:

```
Copyconst one = 1;console.log("one: ", one);// TODO: feed the puppy
const two = 2;// TODO: feed the puppy automaticallyconsole.log("two: ", two);
const three = 3;console.log("three: ", three);// TODO: create a startup selling an automatic puppy feeder
```

It can be hard to keep track of all the created TODOs. Vim has a `:t` (copy) method to copy all matches to an address. To learn more about the copy method, check out `:h :copy`.

To copy all TODOs to the end of the file for easier introspection, run:

```
Copy
:g/TODO/t $
```

Result:

```
Copyconst one = 1;console.log("one: ", one);// TODO: feed the puppy
const two = 2;// TODO: feed the puppy automaticallyconsole.log("two: ", two);
const three = 3;console.log("three: ", three);// TODO: create a startup selling an automatic puppy feeder
// TODO: feed the puppy// TODO: feed the puppy automatically// TODO: create a startup selling an automatic puppy feeder
```

Now I can review all the TODOs I created, find a time to do them or delegate them to someone else, and continue to work on my next task.

If instead of copying them you want to move all the TODOs to the end, use the move command, `:m`:

```
Copy
:g/TODO/m $
```

Result:

```
Copyconst one = 1;console.log("one: ", one);
const two = 2;console.log("two: ", two);
const three = 3;console.log("three: ", three);
// TODO: feed the puppy// TODO: feed the puppy automatically// TODO: create a startup selling an automatic puppy feeder
```

## 多次pattern

#### Reduce Multiple Empty Lines To One Empty Line

If you have a text with multiple empty lines:

```
Copyconst one = 1;console.log("one: ", one);

const two = 2;console.log("two: ", two);




const three = 3;console.log("three: ", three);
```

You can quickly reduce the empty lines into one empty line with:

```
:g/^$/,/./-1j
```

Result:

```
Copyconst one = 1;console.log("one: ", one);
const two = 2;console.log("two: ", two);
const three = 3;console.log("three: ", three);
```

Normally the global command accepts the following form: `:g/pattern/command`. However, you can also run the global command with the following form: `:g/pattern1/,/pattern2/command`. With this, Vim will apply the `command` within `pattern1` and `pattern2`.

With that in mind, let's break down the command `:g/^$/,/./-1j` according to `:g/pattern1/,/pattern2/command`:

- `/pattern1/` is `/^$/`. It represents an empty line (a line with zero character).
- `/pattern2/` is `/./` with `-1` line modifier. `/./` represents a non-empty line (a line with at least one character). The `-1` means the line above that.
- `command` is `j`, the join command (`:j`). In this context, this global command joins all the given lines.

By the way, if you want to reduce multiple empty lines to no lines, run this instead:

```
:g/^$/,/./j
```

A simpler alternative:

```
:g/^$/-j
```

Your text is now reduced to:

```
const one = 1;
console.log("one: ", one);
const two = 2;
console.log("two: ", two);
const three = 3;
console.log("three: ", three);
```

> :j [1,3]  将多行合并成一行
>
> pattern中 ^开头  $结尾  ^$就是空行

## Advanced Sort

Vim has a `:sort` command to sort the lines within a range. For example:

```
Copy
d
b
a
e
c
```

You can sort them by running `:sort`. If you give it a range, it will sort only the lines within that range. For example, `:3,5sort` only sorts lines three and five.

If you have the following expressions:

```
Copyconst arrayB = [  "i",  "g",  "h",  "b",  "f",  "d",  "e",  "c",  "a",]
const arrayA = [  "h",  "b",  "f",  "d",  "e",  "a",  "c",]
```

If you need to sort the elements inside the arrays, but not the arrays themselves, you can run this:

```
Copy
:g/\[/+1,/\]/-1sort
```

Result:

```
Copyconst arrayB = [  "a",  "b",  "c",  "d",  "e",  "f",  "g",  "h",  "i",]
const arrayA = [  "a"  "b",  "c",  "d",  "e",  "f",  "h",]
```

This is great! But the command looks complicated. Let's break it down. This command also follows the form `:g/pattern1/,/pattern2/command`.

- `:g/\[/` is the global command pattern.
- `/\[/+1` is the first pattern. It matches a literal left square bracket "[". The `+1` refers to the line below it.
- `/\]/-1` is the second pattern. It matches a literal right square bracket "]". The `-1` refers to the line above it.
- `/\[/+1,/\]/-1` then refers to any lines between "[" and "]".
- `sort` is a command-line command to sort.