# 宏

简单的脚本

```
qa                     Start recording a macro in register a
q (while recording)    Stop recording macro

@a    Execute macro from register a
@@    Execute the last executed macros
n@a   执行n次
```

主要宏会自动停止！！！

## Command Line Macro

Running `@a` in normal mode is not the only way you can execute macros in Vim. You can also run `:normal @a` command line. `:normal` allows the user to execute any normal mode command passed as argument. In the case above, it is the same as running `@a` from normal mode.

The `:normal` command accepts range as arguments. You can use this to run macro in select ranges. If you want to execute your macro between lines 2 and 3, you can run `:2,3 normal @a`.

## Executing A Macro Across Multiple Files

Suppose you have multiple `.txt` files, each contains some texts. Your task is to uppercase the first word only on lines containing the word "donut". Assume you have `0W~j` in register a (the same macro as before). How can you quickly accomplish this?

First file:

```
Copy
## savory.txt
a. cheddar jalapeno donut
b. mac n cheese donut
c. fried dumpling
```

Second file:

```
Copy
## sweet.txt
a. chocolate donut
b. chocolate pancake
c. powdered sugar donut
```

Third file:

```
Copy
## plain.txt
a. wheat bread
b. plain donut
```

Here is how you can do it:

- `:args *.txt` to find all `.txt` files in your current directory.
- `:argdo g/donut/normal @a` executes the global command `g/donut/normal @a` on each file inside `:args`.
- `:argdo update` executes `update` command to save each file inside `:args` when the buffer has been modified.

If you are not familiar with the global command `:g/donut/normal @a`, it executes the command you give (`normal @a`) on lines that match the pattern (`/donut/`). I will go over the global command in a later chapter.

## 并行宏

```
import { FUNC1 } from "library1";
import { FUNC2 } from "library2";
import { FUNC3 } from "library3";
import foo from "bar";
import { FUNC4 } from "library4";
import { FUNC5 } from "library5";
```

宏：`qa0f{gui{jq`

Recall from earlier section that macros can be executed using the command line command `:normal` (ex: `:3,5 normal @a` executes macro a on lines 3-5). If you run `:1,$ normal @a`, you will see that the macro is being executed on all lines except the "foo" line. It works!